 The Eighth IAPR Workshop on Document Analysis Systems A Complete Optical Character Recognition
Documents Methodology for Historical G.Vamvakas, B.Gatos, N. Stamatopoulos, and §.J.Perantonis
Computational Intelligence Laboratory, Institute of Informatics and Telecommunications,
National C enter for Scientific Research “Demokritos ".

GR-153 10 Agia Paraskevi, Athens, Greece
Attp:/www.iit.demokritos.gr/cil/,

‘gbam, bgat, nstam, sper}@iit.demokritos.gr oe
” %
,
“t  Abstract In this paper a coniplete OCR methodology for
recognizing historical documents, either printed or
handwritten without any knowledge of the font, is
presented. This methodology consists of three steps:
The first tvo steps refer to creating a database for
rraintng using a set of documents, while the third one
refers to recognition of new document images. First, a
pre-processing step that includes image binarization
and enhancement takes place. At a second step a top -
down segmentation approach ts used in order to detect
text lines, words and characters. A clustering scheme
is then adopted in order to group characters of similar
shape. This is a semi-automatic procedure since the

user ts able to interact at any time in order to correct
possible errors of clustering and assign an ASCH
label. After this step, a database is created in order to
be used for recognition. Finally, in the third step, for
every’ new document image the above segmentation
approach takes place while the recognition is bused on
the character database that has been produced at the previous step. 1. Introduction The large amount of documents, cither modern or
historical, that we have in our possession nowadays,
due to the expansion of digital libraries, has pointed
out the need for reliable and accurate systems for
processing them. Historical documents are of more
importance because they are a significant part of our
cultural heritage. During the last decades a lot of
research has been done in the field of Optical
Character Recognition (OCR). Numerous commercial
products have been released that convert digitized documents into text files. usually in ASCIL format.

Although these products process machine ponted

documents successfully, when it comes to handwritten

documents the results are not satisfactory enough.
Moreover. such products are unable to process
historical documents due to their low quality. lack of
standard alphabets and presence of unknown fonts.To
this end, recognition of historical documents 1s one of
the most challenging tasks in OCR.

In the literature, historical document processing 1s
mainly focused on document retrieval. Word-spoturg
techniques for searching and indexing histoncal
documents have been introduced. In [1]. word images
ire grouped into clusters of similar words by using
image matching to find similarity. Then. by annotaung
“interesting” clusters. an index that links words te the
locauons where they occur can be built automaticail.
In [2] and [3] holistic word recognition approaches for
historical documents are presented based on scalar and
profile-based features and on matching word conteurs
respectively. Their goal is to produce reasonable
recognition accuracies which enable performing
retrieval of handwritten pages trom a user-supphied
ASCII query. In [4]. a word spotting technique based
on combing synthetic data and user teed-back for
keyword searching in historical printed documents is
deseribed. However, transtorming whole historical documents
into text Hles is amuch more difMeult task. To the best
of our knowledge. there are neta let of works
following this approach. Moreover. all related works
tend to be focused on the unique characteristics of the
correspond historical document they process, such
as content and writing style. In |S} and lo]. OCR
systems were developed Iespectively for the
recopmbion of characters used in’ the Christian
Orthodox Church Musie notation. In [7]. a Th "HOS. 3337-7 0K S25 00 KR IFFE
Ob 1 1109 DAS 2008.73 A345 ti-
‘computer
Q